oscillator
	is an alternative to trend-following approaches
	extremely useful in trendless market (prices fluctuating in horizontal band or trading range)
	enables profiting from periodic sideways
	also useful in trending phases (in conjunction with other tools) by alerting short term extremes (overbought/oversold)
	can warn that trend is losing momentum before evident in price action
	can signal that trend is near completion by showing certain divergences
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
oscillator usage in conjunction with trend


direction of overriding trend is very important
oscillator
	is only a secondary indicator (must be secondary to basic trend analysis)
	is not that helpful near the beginning of important moves (can even be misleading)
	becomes extremely valuable toward the end of market moves
no study of market extremes is complete without discussing contrary opinion philosophy


@@ interpretation of oscillators
different ways to construct oscillators but interpretation differs very little

most oscillators
	plotted at bottom of chart and resemble a flat horizontal band
	highs & lows in oscillator coincide with highs & lows in chart
some oscillators
	have a midpoint value (usually zero line) that divides the range to 2 halves (upper & lower)
	have upper & lower boundaries ranging from 0 to 100
	
@@ general interpretation rules

when oscillator reaches extreme value in upper/lower ends
	current price move has gone too far too fast (due for correction/consolidation)
when oscillator line in
	lower end:	buy
	upper end:	sell
crossing of midpoint line often used to generate buy/sell signals

@@ 3 situation when oscillator is most useful is when
	1. its value reaches an extreme reading near the upper/lower end of its boundaries (upper=overbought, lower=oversold, warns that trend is overextended/vulnerable)
	2. it's in extreme position and there's a divergence between oscillator & price action (usually an important warning)
	3. it's crossing the zero line (important signal in direction of trend)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MEASURING MOMENTUM

The concept of momentum is the most basic application of oscillator
analysis. Momentum measures the velocity of price changes as
opposed to the actual price levels themselves. Market momentum
is measured by continually taking price differences for a fixed
time interval. To construct a 10 day momentum line, simply subtract
the closing price 10 days ago from the last closing price. This
positive or negative value is then plotted around a zero line. The
formula for momentum is:
	M = V - V^x
where V is the latest closing price and vx is the closing price x
days ago.

If the latest closing price is greater than that of 10 days ago
(in other words, prices have moved higher), then a positive value
would be plotted above the zero line. If the latest close is below
the close 10 days earlier (prices have declined), then a negative
value is plotted below the zero line.

While the 10 day momentum is a commonly used time
period for reasons discussed later, any time period can be
employed. (See Figure 10.la.) A shorter time period (such as 5
days) produces a more sensitive line with more pronounced oscillations.
A longer number of days (such as 40 days) results in a
much smoother line in which the oscillator swings are less
volatile. (See Figure 10.lb.)

@@ Momentum Measures Rates of Ascent or Descent
Let's talk a bit more about just what this momentum indicator is
measuring. By plotting price differences for a set period of time,
the chartist is studying rates of ascent or descent. If prices are rising
and the momentum line is above the zero line and rising, this
means the uptrend is accelerating. If the up-slanting momentum
line begins to flatten out, this means that the new gains being
achieved by the latest closes are the same as the gains 10 days earlier.
While prices may still be advancing, the rate of ascent (or the
velocity) has leveled off. When the momentum line begins to
drop toward the zero line, the uptrend in prices is still in force,
but at a decelerating rate. The uptrend is losing momentum.

When the momentum line moves below the zero line, the
latest 10 day close is now under the close of 10 days ago and a
near term downtrend is in effect. (And, incidentally, the 10 day
moving average also has begun to decline.) As momentum continues
to drop farther below the zero line, the downtrend gains
momentum. Only when the line begins to advance again does the
analyst know that the downtrend is decelerating.

It's important to remember that momentum measures the
differences between prices at two time intervals. In order for the
line to advance, the price gains for the last day's close must be
greater than the gains of 10 days ago. If prices advance by only
the same amount as 10 days ago, the momentum line will be flat.
If the last price gain is less than that of 10 days ago, the momentum
line begins to decline even though prices are still rising. This
is how the momentum line measures the acceleration or deceleration
in the current advance or decline in the price trend.

@@ The Momentum Line Leads the Price Action
Because of the way it is constructed, the momentum line is always
a step ahead of the price movement. It leads the advance or
decline in prices, then levels off while the current price trend is
still in effect. It then begins to move in the opposite direction as
prices begin to level off.

@@ The Crossing of the Zero Line as a Trading Signal
The momentum chart has a zero line. Many technicians use the
crossing of the zero line to generate buy and sell signals. A
crossing above the zero line would be a buy signal, and a crossing
below the zero line, a sell signal. It should be stressed here
again, however, that basic trend analysis is still the overriding
consideration. Oscillator analysis should not be used as an
excuse to trade against the prevailing market trend. Buy positions
should only be taken on crossings above the zero line if
the market trend is up. Short positions should be taken on
crossings below the zero line only if the price trend is down.
(See Figures 10.2a and b.)

@@ The Need for an Upper and Lower Boundary
One problem with the momentum line, as it is described here, is
the absence of a fixed upper and lower boundary. It was stated earlier
that one of the major values of oscillator analysis is being able
to determine when markets are in extreme areas. But, how high is
too high and how low is too low on the momentum line? The
simplest way to solve this problem is by visual inspection. Check
the back history of the momentum line on the chart and draw
horizontal lines along its upper and lower boundaries. These lines
will have to be adjusted periodically, especially after important
trend changes have occurred. But it is the simplest and probably
the most effective way of identifying the outer extremities. (See
Figures 10.3 and 10.4.)

@@ MEASURING RATE OF CHANGE (ROC)
To measure the rate of change, a ratio is constructed of the most
recent closing price to a price a certain number of days in the past.
To construct a 10 day rate of change oscillator, the latest closing
price is divided by the close 10 days ago. The formula is as follows:
	Rate of change= 100 (V /Vx)
where Vis the latest close and Vx is the closing price x days ago.

In this case, the 100 line becomes the midpoint line. If
the latest price is higher than the price 10 days ago (prices are
rising), the resulting rate of change value will be above 100. If
the last close is below 10 days ago, the ratio would be below
100. (Charting software sometimes uses variations of the preceding
formulas for momentum and rate of change. While the
construction techniques may vary, the interpretation remains
the same.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONSTRUCTING AN OSCILLATOR USING TWO MO VING AVERAGES

Chapter 9 discussed two moving averages being used to generate
buy and sell signals. The crossing of the shorter average above or
below the longer average registered buy and sell signals, respectively.
It was mentioned at that time that these dual moving average
combinations could also be used to construct oscillator charts.
This can be done by plotting the difference between the two averages
as a histogram. These histogram bars appear as a plus or
minus value around a centered zero line. This type of oscillator
has three uses:

1. To help spot divergences.

2. To help identify short term variations from the long term
trend, when the shorter average moves too far above or
below the longer average.

3. To pinpoint the crossings of the two moving averages,
which occur when the oscillator crosses the zero line.

The shorter average is divided by the longer. In both cases,
however, the shorter average oscillates around the longer average,
which is in effect the zero line. If the shorter average is above the
longer, the oscillator would be positive. A negative reading would
be present if the shorter average were under the longer. (See
Figures 10.5-10.7.)

When the two moving average lines move too far apart,
a market extreme is created calling for a pause in the trend.
(See Figure 10.6.) Very often, the trend remains stalled until
the shorter average line moves back to the longer. When the
shorter line approaches the longer, a critical point is reached. In
an uptrend, for example, the shorter line dips back to the longer
average, but should bounce off it. This usually represents an ideal
buying area. It's much like the testing of an up trendline. If the
shorter average crosses below the longer average, however, a trend
reversal is signaled.

In a downtrend, a rise in the shorter average to the longer
usually represents an ideal selling area unless the longer line is
crossed, in which case a trend reversal signal would be registered.
The relationships between the two averages can be used, therefore,
not only as an excellent trend-following system, but also to
help identify short term overbought and oversold conditions.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMODITY CHANNEL INDEX

It is possible to normalize an oscillator by dividing the values by
a constant divisor. In the construction of his Commodity
Channel Index (CCI), Donald R. Lambert compares the current
price with a moving average over a selected time span-usually 20
days. He then normalizes the oscillator values by using a divisor
based on mean deviation. As a result, the CCI fluctuates in a constant
range from +100 on the upside to -100 on the downside.
Lambert recommended long positions in those markets with values
over +100. Markets with CCI values below -100 were candidates
for short sales.

It seems, however, that most chartists use CCI simply as an
overbought/oversold oscillator. Used in that fashion readings over
+100 are considered overbought and under -100 are oversold.
While the Commodity Channel Index was originally developed
for commodities, it is also used for trading stock index futures and
options like the S&P 100 (OEX). Although 20 days is the common
default value for CCI, the user can vary the number to adjust its
sensitivity. (See Figures 10.8 and 10.9.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX (RSI)

The RSI was developed by J. Welles Wilder, Jr. and presented in his
1978 book, New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. We're only
going to cover the main points here. A reading of the original
work by Wilder himself is recommended for a more in-depth
treatment. Because this particular oscillator is so popular among
traders, we'll use it to demonstrate most of the principles of oscillator
analysis.

As Wilder points out, one of the two major problems in
constructing a momentum line (using price differences) is the
erratic movement often caused by sharp changes in the values
being dropped off. A sharp advance or a decline 10 days ago (in
the case of a 10 day momentum line) can cause sudden shifts in
the momentum line even if the current prices show little change.
Some smoothing is therefore necessary to minimize these distortions.
The second problem is that there is the need for a constant
range for comparison purposes. The RSI formula not only provides
the necessary smoothing, but also solves the latter problem
by creating a constant vertical range of Oto 100.

The term "relative strength," incidentally, is a misnomer
and often causes confusion among those more familiar with
that term as it is used in stock market analysis. Relative strength
generally means a ratio line comparing two different entities. A
ratio of a stock or industry group to the S&P 500 Index is one
way of gauging the relative strength of different stocks or industry
groups against one objective benchmark. We'll show you
later in the book how useful relative strength or ratio analysis can
be. Wilder's Relative Strength Index doesn't really measure the
relative strength between different entities and, in that sense,
the name is somewhat misleading. The RSI, however, does solve
the problem of erratic movement and the need for a constant
upper and lower boundary. The actual formula is calculated as
follows:
	RS = 100 - ( 100 / (1 + RS) )
	RS = (average of x days' up closes) / (average of x days' down closes)

Fourteen days are used in the calculation; 14 weeks are
used for weekly charts. To find the average up value, add the total
points gained on up days during the 14 days and divide that total
by 14. To find the average down value, add the total number of
points lost during the down days and divide that total by 14.
Relative strength (RS) is then determined by dividing the up average
by the down average. That RS value is then inserted into the
formula for RSI. The number of days can be varied by simply
changing the value of x.

Wilder originally employed a 14 day period. The shorter the
time period, the more sensitive the oscillator becomes and the wider its
amplitude. RSI works best when its fluctuations reach the upper
and lower extremes. Therefore, if the user is trading on a very short
term basis and wants the oscillator swings to be more pronounced,
the time period can be shortened. The time period is lengthened
to make the oscillator smoother and narrower in amplitude. The
amplitude in the 9 day oscillator is therefore greater than the original
14 day. While 9 and 14 day spans are the most common values
used, technicians experiment with other periods. Some use
shorter lengths, such as 5 or 7 days, to increase the volatility of the
RSI line. Others use 21 or 28 days to smooth out the RSI signals.
(See Figures 10.10 and 10.11.)

@@ Interpreting RSI
RSI is plotted on a vertical scale of Oto 100. Movements above
70 are considered overbought, while an oversold condition
would be a move under 30. Because of shifting that takes place
in bull and bear markets, the 80 level usually becomes the overbought
level in bull markets and the 20 level the oversold level
in bear markets.

"Failure swings," as Wilder calls them, occur when the RSI
is above 70 or under 30. A top failure swing occurs when a peak in
the RSI (over 70) fails to exceed a previous peak in an uptrend, followed
by a downside break of a previous trough. A bottom failure
swing occurs when the RSI is in a downtrend (under 30), fails to
set a new low, and then proceeds to exceed a previous peak. (See
Figures 10.12a-b.)

Divergence between the RSI and the price line, when the
RSI is above 70 or below 30, is a serious warning that should be
heeded. Wilder himself considers divergence "the single most
indicative characteristic of the Relative Strength Index" [Wilder, p. 70].

Trendline analysis can be employed to detect changes in
the trend of the RSI. Moving averages can also be used for the
same purpose. (See Figure 10.13.)

In my own personal experience with the RSI oscillator, its
greatest value lies in failure swings or divergences that occur
when the RSI is over 70 or under 30. Let's clarify another important
point on the use of oscillators. Any strong trend, either up
or down, usually produces an extreme oscillator reading before
too long. In such cases, claims that a market is overbought or
oversold are usually premature and can lead to an early exit
from a profitable trend. In strong uptrends, overbought markets
can stay overbought for some time. Just because the oscillator
has moved into the upper region is not reason enough to liquidate
a long position (or, even worse, short into the strong
uptrend).

The first move into the overbought or oversold region is
usually just a warning. The signal to pay close attention to is the
second move by the oscillator into the danger zone. If the second
move fails to confirm the price move into new highs or new lows
(forming a double top or bottom on the oscillator), a possible
divergence exists. At that point, some defensive action can be
taken to protect existing positions. If the oscillator moves in the
opposite direction, breaking a previous high or low, then a divergence
or failure swing is confirmed.

The SO level is the RSI midpoint value, and will often act
as support during pullbacks and resistance during bounces.
Some traders treat RSI crossings above and below the SO level as
buying and selling signals respectively.

@@ USING THE 70 AND 30 LINES TO GENERATE SIGNALS
Horizontal lines appear on the oscillator chart at the 70 and 30
values. Traders often use those lines to generate buy and sell signals.
We already know that a move under 30 warns of an oversold
condition. Suppose the trader thinks a market is about to
bottom and is looking for a buying opportunity. He or she
watches the oscillator dip under 30. Some type of divergence or
double bottom may develop in the oscillator in that oversold
region. A crossing back above the 30 line at that point is taken
by many traders as a confirmation that the trend in the oscillator
has turned up. Accordingly, in an overbought market, a
crossing back under the 70 line can often be used as a sell signal.
(See Figure 10.14.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
STOCHASTICS (K%D)

The Stochastic oscillator was popularized by George Lane (president
of Investment Educators, Inc., Watseka, IL). It is based on the
observation that as prices increase, closing prices tend to be closer
to the upper end of the price range. Conversely, in downtrends,
the closing price tends to be near the lower end of the range. Two
lines are used in the Stochastic Process-the %K line and the %D
line. The %D line is the more important and is the one that provides
the major signals.

The intent is to determine where the most recent closing price
is in relation to the price range for a chosen time period. Fourteen is
the most common period used for this oscillator. To determine the K
line, which is the more sensitive of the two, the formula is:
	%K = 100 * ((C - L14) / (H14 - L14))
where C is the latest close, L14 is the lowest low for the last 14
periods, and H14 is the highest high for the same 14 periods (14
periods can refer to days, weeks, or months).

The formula simply measures, on a percentage basis of O to
100, where the closing price is in relation to the total price range
for a selected time period. A very high reading (over 80) would put
the closing price near the top of the range, while a low reading
(under 20) near the bottom of the range.

The second line (o/oD) is a 3 period moving average of the
o/oK line. This formula produces a version called fast stochastics.
By taking another 3 period average of %D, a smoother version
called slow stochastics is computed. Most traders use the slow stochastics
because of its more reliable signals.*

These formulas produce two lines that oscillate between a
vertical scale from Oto 100. The Kline is a faster line, while the D
line is a slower line. The major signal to watch for is a divergence
between the D line and the price of the underlying market when
the D line is in an overbought or oversold area. The upper and
lower extremes are the 80 and 20 values. (See Figure 10.15.)

A bearish divergence occurs when the D line is over 80 and
forms two declining peaks while prices continue to move higher.
A bullish divergence is present when the D line is under 20 and
forms two rising bottoms while prices continue to move lower.
Assuming all of these factors are in place, the actual buy or sell signal
is triggered when the faster K line crosses the slower D line.

There are other refinements in the use of Stochastics, but
this explanation covers the more essential points. Despite the higher
level of sophistication, the basic oscillator interpretation remains
the same. An alert or set-up is present when the o/oD line is in an
extreme area and diverging from the price action. The actual signal
takes place when the D line is crossed by the faster K line.

The Stochastic oscillator can be used on weekly and monthly
charts for longer range perspective. It can also be used effectively
on intraday charts for shorter term trading. (See Figure 10.16.)

One way to combine daily and weekly stochastics is to use
weekly signals to determine market direction and daily signals for
timing. It's also a good idea to combine stochastics with RSI. (See
Figure 10.17.)

*The second smoothing produces 3 lines. Fast stochastics uses the first 2 lines.
Slow stochastics uses the last 2 lines.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
LARRY WILLIAMS %R

Larry Williams %R is based on a similar concept of measuring the
latest close in relation to its price range over a given number of
days. Today's close is subtracted from the price high of the range
for a given number of days and that difference is divided by the
total range for the same period. The concepts already discussed for
oscillator interpretation are applied to %R as well, with the main
factors being the presence of divergences in overbought or oversold
areas. (See Figure 10.18.) Since %R is subtracted from the
high, it looks like an upside down stochastics. To correct that,
charting packages plot an inverted version of %R.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Choice of Time Period Tied to Cycles

Oscillator lengths can be tied to underlying market cycles. A time
period of 1/ 2 the cycle length is used. Popular time inputs are 5, 10,
and 20 days based on calendar day periods of 14, 28, and 56 days.
Wilder's RSI uses 14 days, which is half of 28. In the previous
chapter, we discussed some reasons why the numbers 5, 10, and
20 keep cropping up in moving average and oscillator formulations,
so we won't repeat them here. Suffice it to mention here
that 28 calendar days (20 trading days) represent an important
dominant monthly trading cycle and that the other numbers are
related harmonically to that monthly cycle. The popularity of the
10 day momentum and the 14 day RSI lengths are based largely
on the 28 day trading cycle and measure 1/2 of the value of that
dominant trading cycle. We'll come back to the importance of
cycles in Chapter 14.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE IMPORTANCE OF TREND

In this chapter, we've discussed the use of the oscillator in market
analysis to help determine near term overbought and oversold
conditions, and to alert traders to possible divergences. We started
with the momentum line. We discussed another way to measure
rates of change (ROC) by using price ratios instead of differences.
We then showed how two moving averages could be compared
to spot short term extremes and crossovers. Finally, we
looked at RSI and Stochastics and considered how oscillators
should be synchronized with cycles.

Divergence analysis provides us with the oscillator's greatest
value. However, the reader is cautioned against placing too much
importance on divergence analysis to the point where basic trend
analysis is either ignored or overlooked. Most oscillator buy signals
work best in uptrends and oscillator sell signals are most profitable
in downtrends. The place to start your market analysis is always by
determining the general trend of the market. If the trend is up,
then a buying strategy is called for. Oscillators can then be used to
help time market entry. Buy when the market is oversold in an
uptrend. Sell short when the market is overbought in a downtrend.
Or, buy when the momentum oscillator crosses back above the
zero line when the major trend is bullish and sell a crossing under
the zero line in a bear market.

The importance of trading in the direction of the major
trend cannot be overstated. The danger in placing too much importance
on oscillators by themselves is the temptation to use divergence
as an excuse to initiate trades contrary to the general trend.
This action generally proves a costly and painful exercise. The oscillator,
as useful as it is, is just one tool among many others and must
always be used as an aid, not a substitute, for basic trend analysis.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
WHEN OSCILLATORS ARE MOST USEFUL

There are times when oscillators are more useful than at others.
During choppy market periods, as prices move sideways for several
weeks or months, oscillators track the price movement very closely.
The peaks and troughs on the price chart coincide almost exactly
with the peaks and troughs on the oscillator. Because both price
and oscillator are moving sideways, they look very much alike. At
some point, however, a price breakout occurs and a new uptrend or
downtrend begins. By its very nature, the oscillator is already in an
extreme position just as the breakout is taking place. If the breakout
is to the upside, the oscillator is already overbought. An oversold
reading usually accompanies a downside breakout. The trader
is faced with a dilemma. Should he or she buy the bullish breakout
in the face of an overbought oscillator reading? Should the downside
breakout be sold into an oversold market?

In such cases, the oscillator is best ignored for the time
being and the position taken. The reason for this is that in the
early stages of a new trend, following an important breakout,
oscillators often reach extremes very quickly and stay there for
awhile. Basic trend analysis should be the main consideration at
such times, with oscillators given a lesser role. Later on, as the
trend begins to mature, the oscillator should be given greater
weight. (We'll see in Chapter 13, that the fifth and final wave in
Elliott Wave analysis is often confirmed by bearish oscillator
divergences.) Many dynamic bull moves have been missed by
traders who saw the major trend signal, but decided to wait for
their oscillators to move into an oversold condition before buying.
To summarize, give less attention to the oscillator in the early
stages of an important move, but pay close attention to its signals
as the move reaches maturity.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MOVING AVERAGE CONVERGENCE/DIVERGENCE (MACD)

We mentioned in the previous chapter an oscillator technique
that uses 2 exponential moving averages and here it is. The
Moving Average Convergence/Divergence indicator, or simply
MACD, was developed by Gerald Appel. What makes this indicator
so useful is that it combines some of the oscillator principles
we've already explained with a dual moving average crossover
approach. You'll see only two lines on your computer screen
although three lines are actually used in its calculation. The faster
line (called the MACD line) is the difference between two exponentially
smoothed moving averages of closing prices (usually the
last 12 and 26 days or weeks). The slower line (called the signal
line) is usually a 9 period exponentially smoothed average of the
MACD line. Appel originally recommended one set of numbers
for buy signals and another for sell signals. Most traders, however,
utilize the default values of 12, 26, and 9 in all instances. That
would include daily and weekly values. (See Figure 10.19a.)

The actual buy and sell signals are given when the two
lines cross. A crossing by the faster MACD line above the slower
signal line is a buy signal. A crossing by the faster line below the
slower is a sell signal. In that sense, MACD resembles a dual moving
average crossover method. However, the MACD values also
fluctuate above and below a zero line. That's where it begins to
resemble an oscillator. An overbought condition is present when
the lines are too far above the zero line. An oversold condition is
present when the lines are too far below the zero line. The best
buy signals are given when prices are well below the zero line
(oversold). Crossings above and below the zero line are another
way to generate buy and sell signals respectively, similar to the
momentum technique we discussed previously.

Divergences appear between the trend of the MACD lines
and the price line. A negative, or bearish, divergence exists when
the MACD lines are well above the zero line (overbought) and start
to weaken while prices continue to trend higher. That is often a
warning of a market top. A positive, or bullish, divergence exists
when the MACD lines are well below the zero line (oversold) and
start to move up ahead of the price line. That is often an early sign
of a market bottom. Simple trendlines can be drawn on the MACO
lines to help identify important trend changes. (See Figure 10.19b.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MACO HISTOGRAM

We showed you earlier in the chapter how a histogram could be
constructed that plots the difference between two moving average
lines. Using that same technique, the two MACD lines can be
turned into an MACD histogram. The histogram consists of vertical
bars that show the difference between the two MACD lines.
The histogram has a zero line of its own. When the MACD lines
are in positive alignment (faster line over the slower), the histogram
is above its zero line. Crossings by the histogram above
and below its zero line coincide with actual MACD crossover buy
and sell signals.

The real value of the histogram is spotting when the
spread between the two lines is widening or narrowing. When
the histogram is over its zero line (positive) but starts to fall
toward the zero line, the uptrend is weakening. Conversely,
when the histogram is below its zero line (negative) and starts
to move upward toward the zero line, the downtrend is losing
its momentum. Although no actual buy or sell signal is given
until the histogram crosses its zero line, the histogram turns
provide earlier warnings that the current trend is losing
momentum. Turns in the histogram back toward the zero line
always precede the actual crossover signals. Histogram turns are
best used for spotting early exit signals from existing positions.
It's much more dangerous to use the histogram turns as an
excuse to initiate new positions against the prevailing trend.
(See Figure 10.20a.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMBINE WEEKLIES AND DAILIES

As with all technical indicators, signals on weekly charts are
always more important than those on daily charts. The best way
to combine them is to use weekly signals to determine market
direction and the daily signals to fine-tune entry and exit
points. A daily signal is followed only when it agrees with the
weekly signal. Used in that fashion, the weekly signals become
trend filters for daily signals. That prevents using daily signals to
trade against the prevailing trend. Two crossover systems in
which this principle is especially true are MACD and Stochastics.
(See Figure 10.20b.)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE PRINCIPLE OF CONTRARY OPINION IN FUTURES

Oscillator analysis is the study of market extremes. One of the
most widely followed theories in measuring those market
extremes is the principle of Contrary Opinion. At the beginning
of the book, two principal philosophies of market analysis were
identified-fundamental and technical analysis. Contrary
Opinion, although it is generally listed under the category of
technical analysis, is more aptly described as a form of psychological
analysis. Contrary Opinion adds the important third
dimension to market analysis-the psychological-by determining
the degree of bullishness or bearishness among participants in
the various financial markets.

The principle of Contrary Opinion holds that when the
vast majority of people agree on anything, they are generally
wrong. A true contrarian, therefore, will first try to determine
what the majority are doing and then will act in the opposite
direction.

Humphrey B . Neill, considered the dean of contrary
thinking, described his theories in a 1954 book entitled, The Art
of Contrary Thinking. Ten years later, in 1964, James H. Sibbet
began to apply Neill's principles to commodity futures trading
by creating the Market Vane advisory service, which includes
the Bullish Consensus numbers (Market Vane, P.O. Box 90490,
Pasadena, CA 91109). Each week a poll of market letters is taken
to determine the degree of bullishness or bearishness among
commodity professionals. The purpose of the poll is to quantify
market sentiment into a set of numbers that can be analyzed
and used in the market forecasting process. The rationale behind
this approach is that most futures traders are influenced to a
great extent by market advisory services. By monitoring the
views of the professional market letters, therefore, a reasonably
accurate gauge of the attitudes of the trading public can be
obtained.

Another service that provides an indication of market sentiment
is the "Consensus Index of Bullish Market Opinion," published
by Consensus National Commodity Futures Weekly
(Consensus, Inc., 1735 McGee Street, Kansas City, MO 64108).
These numbers are published each Friday and use 75% as an overbought
and 25% as an oversold measurement.

@@ Interpreting Bullish Consensus Numbers
Most traders seem to employ a fairly simple method of analyzing
these weekly numbers. If the numbers are above 75%, the market
is considered to be overbought and means that a top may be near.
A reading below 25% is interpreted to warn of an oversold condition
and the increased likelihood that a market bottom is near.

@@ Contrary Opinion Measures Remaining Buying or Selling Power
Consider the case of an individual speculator. Assume that speculator
reads his or her favorite newsletter and becomes convinced
that a market is about to move substantially higher. The
more bullish the forecast, the more aggressively that trader will
approach the market. Once that individual speculator's funds
are fully committed to that particular market, however, he or
she is overbought-meaning there are no more funds to commit
to the market.

Expanding this situation to include all market participants,
if 80-90% of market traders are bullish on a market, it is
assumed that they have already taken their market positions.
Who is left to buy and push the market higher? This then is one
of the keys to understanding Contrary Opinion. If the overwhelming
sentiment of market traders is on one side of the market,
there simply isn't enough buying or selling pressure left to
continue the present trend.

@@ Contrary Opinion Measures Strong Versus Weak Hands
A second feature of this philosophy is its ability to compare strong
versus weak hands. Futures trading is a zero sum game. For every
long there is also a short. If 80% of the traders are on the long side
of a market, then the remaining 20% (who are holding short positions)
must be well financed enough to absorb the longs held by
the other 80%. The shorts, therefore, must be holding much larger
positions than the longs (in this case, 4 to 1).

This means further that the shorts must be well capitalized
and are considered to be strong hands. The 80%, who are holding
much smaller positions per trader, are considered to be weaker
hands who will be forced to liquidate those longs on any sudden
turn in prices.

@@ Some Additional Features of the Bullish Consensus Numbers
Let's consider a few additional points that should be kept in mind
when using these numbers. The norm or equilibrium point is at
55%. This allows for a built-in bullish bias on the part of the general
public. The upper extreme is considered to be 90% and the
lower extreme, 20%. Here again, the numbers are shifted upward
slightly to allow for the bullish bias.

A contrarian position can usually be considered when the
bullish consensus numbers are above 90% or under 20%.
Readings over 75% or under 25% are also considered warning
zones and suggest that a turn may be near. However, it is generally
advisable to await a change in the trend of the numbers before
taking action against the trend. A change in the direction of the
Bullish Consensus numbers, especially if it occurs from one of the
danger zones, should be watched closely.

@@ The Importance of Open Interest (Futures)
Open interest also plays a role in the use of Bullish Consensus numbers.
In general, the higher the open interest figures are, the better the
chance that the contrarian positions will prove profitable. A contrarian
position should not be taken, however, while open interest is still
increasing. A continued rise in open interest numbers increases the
odds that the present trend will continue. Wait for the open interest
numbers to begin to flatten out or to decline before taking action.

Study the Commitments of Traders Report to ensure that
hedgers hold less than 50% of the open interest. Contrary Opinion
works better when most of the open interest is held by speculators,
who are considered to be weaker hands. It is not advisable to trade
against large hedging interests.

@@ Watch the Market's Reaction to Fundamental News
Watch the market's reaction to fundamental news very closely.
The failure of prices to react to bullish news in an overbought
area is a clear warning that a turn may be near. The first
adverse news is usually enough to quickly push prices in the
other direction. Correspondingly, the failure of prices in an
oversold area (under 25%) to react to bearish news can be
taken as a warning that all the bad news has been fully discounted
in the current low price. Any bullish news will push
prices higher.

@@ Combine Contrarian Opinion with Other Technical Tools
As a general rule, trade in the same direction as the trend of the
consensus numbers until an extreme is reached, at which time the
numbers should be monitored for a sign of a change in trend. It
goes without saying that standard technical analytical tools can
and should also be employed to help identify market turns at
these critical times. The breaking of support or resistance levels,
trendlines, or moving averages can be utilized to help confirm
that the trend is in fact turning. Divergences on oscillator charts
are especially useful when the Bullish Consensus numbers are
overbought or oversold.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INVESTOR SENTIMENT READINGS

Each weekend Barron's includes in its Market Laboratory section a
set of numbers under the heading "Investor Sentiment Readings."
In that space, four different investor polls are included to gauge
the degree of bullishness and bearishness in the stock market. The
figures are given for the latest week and the period two and three
weeks back for comparison purposes. Here's a random sample of
what the latest week's figures might look like. Remember that
these numbers are contrary indicators. Too much bullishness is
bad. Too much bearishness is good.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INVESTORS INTELLIGENCE NUMBERS

Investors Intelligence (30 Church Street, New Rochelle, NY
10801) takes a weekly poll of investment advisors and produces
three numbers-the percent of investment advisors that are bullish,
those that are bearish, and those that are expecting a market
correction. Bullish readings over 55% warn of too much optimism
and are potentially negative for the market. Bullish readings
below 35% reflect too much pessimism and are considered positive
for the market. The correction figure represents advisers who
are bullish but expecting short term weakness.

Investors Intelligence also publishes figures each week that
measure the number of stocks that are above their 10 and 30 week
moving averages. Those numbers can also be used in a contrary
fashion. Readings above 70% suggest an overbought stock market.
Readings below 30% suggest an oversold market. The 10 week
readings are useful for measuring short to intermediate market
turns. The 30 week numbers are more useful for measuring major
market turns. The actual signal of a potential change in trend
takes place when the numbers rise back above 30 or fall back
below 70.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------