user researcher
	UX researchers define who our users are by examining their behaviors, activities, obligations, needs, and environment.
	They utilize these observations along with analytical data to identify user struggles inside and outside of the product and provide potential solutions to the team.
	Researchers reinforce the concept that user experience encompasses the holistic environment in which the user exists, not just the product.

	Focus: Who is our user and what is their environment? 
	Toolkit: Contextual observation, user interviews, analytical statistics (Pendo), user surveys, process life cycle, user journey mapping, opportunity workshop, personas

information architect
	UX architects examine the content that needs to be delivered to users.
	They organize information and establish content hierarchy based on the user’s conceptual model, and how the information influences the user’s thought process and behaviors.

	Focus: How do users search and find content? 
	Toolkit: Grouping information clusters, card sorting, content hierarchy, sitemaps

interaction designer
	Interaction designers map how users can easily move through a product to achieve their goals.
	They define clear pathways and establish consistent behaviors to help point users in the direction of success.
	They introduce animations as feedback indicators as the user travels down a product’s pathways.

	Focus: How do users move through a product or application? 
	Toolkit: Workflows, wireframes, whiteboard sessions, task flow diagrams, development lingo, animations

visual designer
	Visual designers build upon the initial design theories established by an interaction designer and apply typographical hierarchy, color, material patterns, and iconography.
	They establish how the smaller components or microinteractions fit together to formulate the overall visual appeal of a product.

	Focus: What is visually appealing to our users? 
	Toolkit: overall layout, typography, patterns, iconography, microInteractions, color palettes

prototyper
	Prototypers may be disguised as UXers, engineers, or data scientists.
	They create a variety of interactive workflows with coded or non-coded prototypes to provide a proof of concept.
	They help the team understand if an interactive pattern effectively solves a problem or needs to be modified.

	Focus: How do we capture design ideas, bring them to life, and test their interactivity? 
	Toolkit: clickable workflows, interactive animations, HTML/CSS/JavaScript

usability expert
	Usability experts investigate whether a product’s pathways make sense to users.
	They identify where users get lost or confused via testing and provide feedback to the team to make necessary adjustments.
	Their findings help influence product revisions and future ideation.

	Focus: Is our product easy to use? Will customers use our product? 
	Toolkit: test plans, proof of concept, testing debriefs, guerrilla testing, A/B testing

content strategist 
	Content strategists analyze the user’s language and understand how to speak to users in their own terms.
	They decide which content will be created, when it will be published, and how it will be exposed to the user.
	Content strategists set the product’s voice and determine the tone that will be used when addressing users in various situations.
	
	Focus: What language do our users speak? How can we talk to our users effectively? 
	Toolkit: content modeling, product voice, tone decisions, content guidelines